XU4
===
   
   "Prepare yourself for a grand adventure: Ultima IV, sixteen times
   larger than Ultima III, is a milestone in computer gaming.  Lord
   British has produced a game to challenge, not only your physical
   and mental skills, but the true fabric of your character.  The evil
   triad of Mondain, Minax, and the hellspawn Exodus, have been
   vanquished and peace reigns throughout the land of Britannia.  Evil
   yet abounds, but in isolated pockets and in the hearts of men.  A
   new age awaits the coming of one who can conquer evil on all
   frontiers through the mastery of both magic and the use of force.
   Daemons, dragons and long-dead wizards still plague the countryside
   and must be destroyed.  The seeker on the path of the avatar will
   faces hostile groups composed of mixed enemy types and will survive
   such encounters only by strategic use of weapons and terrain.
   Earthly victories over seemingly impossible odds lead to the final
   conflict, where the ultimate challenge -- the self -- awaits..."
     -- Back cover of Ultima IV box
   
XU4 is a recreation of the classic computer game Ultima IV. The
purpose of the project is to make it easy and convenient to play on
modern operating systems.  xu4 is primarily inspired by the much more
ambitious project Exult.  Linux is the primary development platform
but it gets ported to Windows regularly and is rumored to work on Mac
OS X, too.  It should be trivial to port to any system with SDL
support.

XU4 isn't a new game based on the Ultima IV story -- it is a faithful
recreation of the old game, right up to the crappy graphics.  If you
are looking for a game with modern gameplay and graphics, this is not
it -- yet.  New features that improve the gameplay and keep with the
spirit of the original game will be added.


STATUS
------

New in v0.08:
 - 2xSaI scaler (now the default)
 - fullscreen mode (-f on the command line)
 - skip intro mode (-i on the command line)
 - shrines and meditation, more actions affect karma
 - sleep fields and poison now work
 - if the party dies, they are now resurrected by Lord British
 - spell casting improvements: Awaken, Cure, Heal, Dispel, Resurrect work

New in v0.07:
 - items searchable (runes, white & black stones, bell, book, candle,
   etc.)
 - city residents now move and have animated tiles
 - gem viewing (tiles aren't quite right)
 - getting chests
 - some actions now affect your virtues (stealing chests, talking to
   hawkwind, finding runes and stones)
 - companions will now join the party if asked
 - added filtering to the scaled images, like exult (2xBilinear only,
   for now); the -scale parameter now accepts a number or "2xBi" for
   filtered scaling (2 is still the default, 2xBi looks bad without
   the VGA upgrade)

New in v0.06:
 - horses, ships, balloons (accessible through debug menu)
 - wind
 - line of sight (no longer possible to see through walls)
 - moongates

New in v0.05:
 - background music!
 - Hawkwind dialog
 - weapons and armor vendors work (partially)
 - new debug menu available with ctrl-c
 - intro map is animated, plus other fixes in the intro sequence
 - lots more minor bug fixes

New in v0.04:
 - the initiate new game sequence and character creation mostly complete
 - lots of minor fixes and code reorganization behind the scenes

New in v0.03:
 - support for the VGA upgrade patch
 - "Wear Armour", "Ready Weapon", "New Order", "Locate Position" commands work
 - more progress on spells
 - water, lava, energy fields are all animated
 - an animated cursor is shown
 - the moons cycle through their phases
 - Lord British talks!  Doesn't heal yet, though

New in v0.02:
 - dynamic scaling ("./u4 -scale 1" runs at original resolution,
   "./u4 -scale 2" and twice normal size, etc)
 - ztats now display character stats and inventory
 - the Ultima 4 data files can now be located in the current
   directory, a subdirectory called "ultima4", /usr/lib/u4/ultima4 or
   /usr/local/lib/u4/ultima4
 - the Ultima 4 data files can be uppercase or lowercase
 - some work on spells has begun

v0.01 features:
 - stunning EGA graphics
 - walking around the world, entering cities and castles
 - the ladders between the two floors in the castle of Lord British
 - conversations with citizens (not merchants, Lord British, or
   Hawkwind)
 - saving the game remembers your position
 - unlocking and opening of doors

To do, in no particular order:
 - sound
 - dungeons
 - karma
 - monsters, combat
 - spells
 - autoconf, automake
 - everything else :)

Some thoughts for possible improvements:
 - Ultima 5 style aiming in combat (i.e. allow angle shots)
 - support for higher-resolution tile sets
 - allow the map view to display more of the world
 - read Ultima 4 for DOS files straight out of zip file
 - automatically fetch Ultima 4 for DOS if not found
 - move hardcoded data (tile attributes, starting attributes, etc.)
   into xml config file


COMPILING
---------

Note that you need SDL, the SDL development libraries & headers, and
the SDL_mixer library to compile.  TiMidity++ may be necessary on some
platforms, too.  Assuming they are present, type make in the src
directory to build it.  An executable called u4 is created.


RUNNING
-------

The actual data files from Ultima 4 are loaded at runtime, which means
that a copy of Ultima 4 for DOS must be present at runtime.
Fortunately, Ultima IV is available as closed-source freeware on the
internet (legally).  A copy is mirrored at xu4.sourceforge.net.

It is also available from
http://www.zip.com.au/~mfleming/ultima/u4download.html,
http://members.tripod.com/~hardwire1/ultima4.zip, 
http://www.members.aol.com/tommage/UltimaPage/ultima4.zip, or
http://www.nightfall.org/~deep/ultima/main.html among many other
sites.

Once downloaded, it must be unzipped in one of four places:
 - the current directory when u4 is run
 - a subdirectory named "ultima4" of the current directory
 - "/usr/lib/u4/ultima4/"
 - "/usr/local/lib/u4/ultima4/"

As of version 0.02, xu4 can handle uppercase or lowercase filenames.

xu4 accepts the following command line options:
 -f       - fullscreen mode
 -i       - skip the intro, go directly into the game
 -q       - quiet mode - no music
 -scale n - scale the original graphics by a factor of n; two special
            scalers called 2xSaI and 2xBi can also be specified
 -v       - verbose output; prints out information useful for
            troubleshooting


ULTIMA 4 DOCUMENTATION
----------------------

Included with Ultima 4 for DOS, as downloaded from one of the above
sites, are electronic copies of the printed documentation from the
original Ultima IV box.  HISTORY.TXT contains the "The History of
Britannia", a general introduction to the world of Ultima IV.
WISDOM.TXT contains "The Book of Mystic Wisdom", which explains the
system of magic and provides descriptions of the spells and reagents.

PDF versions of these books may be available from:
http://members.aol.com/trigonman3/u4.html

An image of the cloth map from the original Ultima IV box can be found
at either of these sites:
http://members.aol.com/trigonman3/u4.html
http://www.dengler.net/xedragon/hrump/


MISC
----

See http://xu4.sourceforge.net/links.html for some other interesting
Ultima IV related links.

Please send me a mail at andrewtaylor@users.sourceforge.net if you are
interested in helping.
